So with the illustration of
these concepts out of the way,
I wanna make sure your brains
are fully firing on all cylinders.
So we're gonna go through
some warm-up exercises.
These are not actually ones
that you're gonna be coding.
But I am going to pause for
a moment in between each and
actually want you to spend a little
bit of time thinking about writing,
coding, drawing something, how you
might tackle these kinds of problems.
So here are a few warm-ups
that I want us to go through.
The first one you don't
actually need to code, but
I just want you to think
about in your mind.
This is actually code,
fun little story that my son wrote.
I taught my son how to write this code.
I had to dictate a fair amount
of it to him, let's be honest.
But he's twelve, and he asked me one day,
I don't even know how we got on the topic,
but he asked me one day about binary
versus base 10 number representation.
And I said, this is a very
straightforward algorithm for
how you convert from binary to base 10 and
vice versa.
And I learned it about his age,
maybe age 13 or so.
So I was like,
let me explain the algorithm to you.
So I explained to him the steps that
you take, and we did it manually first,
where he converted a number from,
he just made up some ones and zeros, and
then we figured out what the number
representation of that was.
And then I was like,
now that we've written out those steps,
we could write that in code.
And let me show you how to do that.
So it was mostly me teaching
him how to do the steps and
then I helped him kind of figure
out what code to write here.
But if we wanted to convert
from binary to decimal,
you can go back and
take a look at the slides.
The point of the workshop is not
that code, but think in your mind,
if somebody asked you convert binary to
decimal and you didn't already have it,
is the only answer,
let me look for an NPM package?
Sometimes that's the right answer.
I'm not saying that's a bad answer.
Sometimes that's the right answer if
it's something that we definitely know
there's a lot of gotchas and
we don't wanna trip over those gotchas and
we just need to expediently
get a good solid solution.
Nothing wrong with looking for
a good solid solution.
But sometimes being able to solve that
problem yourself is useful, being able
to translate a series of steps that you
could do on pen and paper down into code,
that's one of the key first steps
to becoming a better algorithmist.
So maybe on some free time,
you might try your hand at this and
then check your code against mine.
There's other ways of doing it,
maybe you have a better way.
Here's another problem.
I actually stumbled across
this one most recently.
This one might look kinda strange.
I don't know why, but in my social media
feeds, these were popping up for a while.
If somebody gave you a set of squares,
you were told they were squares,
and they said, how can you pack
those squares into a larger square
that is of the smallest possible size?
If we were thinking about this as
a shipping container and this is 2D,
we're looking at it from above,
how would we pack these boxes into
the smallest shipping container?
Well, for four,
that's pretty straightforward.
You just do a two by two grid,
that's the smallest.
For nine, that's pretty easy,
a three by three grid.
But what about for other numbers?
And this is the question for 17 boxes, and
you think to yourself, well,
how would I make a square?
It can't be a rectangle.
How would I make a square?
What's the smallest square container?
You might think a five by five would
be the smallest container, and
then you just wouldn't use
some of the free space.
But it turns out that you can
rearrange things, and this,
I think, is a 4.356 by 4.356 outer square.
And at present, this is not proven
to be the best solution, but
it is the best known solution to
the number 17 square packing problem.
There are all kinds of other
packing problems, by the way,
packing of spheres and
packing of other kinds of shapes.
This is a whole area of mathematics.
But take a moment and think,
if you were asked to write
some code to figure this out,
where would you start?
And this is rhetorical, I'm not actually
asking you where would you start, but
I'm asking you to think about it.
Where would you start if the problem was,
given n number of squares,
how do I compute the best packing?
Because that is a piece of software that I
guarantee somebody has written somewhere,
somebody's written for shipping,
manufacturing, whatever.
Somebody's written algorithms for figuring
out how to pack stuff into the boxes.
Although, the junk that I get from Amazon
doesn't look particularly optimized,
so maybe that software does exist.
But I just imagine somebody's got to have
written the software to figure out how to
pack things more efficiently.
How would you do that if
you were tasked with it?
An algorithmist doesn't shun
away from a problem like that.
I'll be honest with you,
I don't know that there is code.
It's not like I'm withholding
the right answer from you.
This is purposely trying to get your
brain firing on those cylinders,
to think about what could be
a potentially pretty challenging problem,
what are the first steps that you'd take?
Hopefully, in your mind,
you're going back to the list of four
techniques that I gave you at
the beginning of our workshop.
Hopefully, you're going back and
saying I need to ask some questions.
Is it any number?
Is there a maximum number?
[LAUGH] Even am I allowed to
go outside of the bounds?
There's all kinds of questions that
you probably wanna ask to clarify and
go about this solution differently.
You might ask,
is it only two dimensional or
do I also have to have an algorithm that
works three dimensionally stacking on top?
Cuz it might be very different if I
had three dimensions to work with.
Asking good clarifying questions
should be your first step.
Probably step 1.b, if I went back and
added a little step in between those,
is pull out a pen and
a sheet of paper, in this case,
literally having a pen and
a sheet of paper drawing out solutions.
But you'd be surprised how often
writing out your problem and
drawing out your problem helps
your brain to organize and
get to those first few steps that you
might start picking a data structure or
picking an algorithm, just being
able to organize things visually.
It is said, and I don't know whether
it's true, but it is said that we're
all born inherently with visual
communication and visual spatial skills,
and many of us unlearn those
skills through nature and nurture.
I don't know that to be scientifically
factual, but I do know many,
many people, including myself,
who have been able to foster that skill.
It is a discipline that you can foster and
build.
And so if even if you're one of those who
would never think to pull out a sheet of
paper and draw something,
I encourage you to try that.
As an algorithmist,
I think you will find that it will
help you unlock and organize better.
Okay, let's move on to the next one.
I'm gonna play this video in just a
moment, but I wanna give you the problem.
This happened to be, I had this problem
on my mind, I had written it down,
and then I just happen to experience
this live having been done.
Here's the problem.
Let's say that you're working with
a geographic map and you see on here these
icons, the multicolor with
the numbers in between them.
These various different icons
that have been plotted onto this
I'll explain in just a moment
what the icons represent.
But imagine if the problem was,
at different zoom levels of this map,
you need to decide whether or
not to individually represent each one
of those points of interest as an icon.
Or at what level of the zoom are points
close enough that they should be
combined into a single icon, just to
reduce the visual clutter of the map?
This is an extremely important
kind of an algorithm, and
there actually are real algorithms for
this and you can go and Google them.
But if somebody asked you, hey, our map
is too cluttered, when people zoom out to
level 11, it's too cluttered, how do we
figure out how to make it less cluttered?
Dropping the icons is one answer, but
merging the icons is another answer.
It's a more sophisticated and
more pleasing answer.
So as I play this,
you'll see this was actually a map
that I encountered a few weeks ago.
And literally, I just accidentally found,
you'll notice as I zoom out,
there's pretty cluttered.
Notice how they replotted those points and
they start grouping them together.
And the numbers go up as they've grouped
them together, so they kind of indicate to
you visually more of these things
have been grouped together.
S, they're applying something
like this algorithm in this map.
Where would you start?
How would you decide how to
implement something like that?
And while you think about that,
I'll give you the backstory of the map.
This is a map from a couple of weeks ago.
I'm from Austin and we had a historic
electrical outage after a historic ice
storm, we don't get very many
of those in Austin, Texas.
We had a huge ice storm and there was
a ridiculous amount of power outages.
I think something like 70% of the city was
without power for prolonged periods of
time, and some people, it took almost two
weeks to get their electricity restored.
And this is in a major metropolitan city.
Imagine the rural areas
must have much worse.
But this was the power outage map,
and this was day 12, and
there were still that many power outages
on day 12 in the middle of Austin, Texas.
So I just happened to see it,
seem like a really good illustration
of what I was describing.
But again, think to yourself for a moment,
what would be the questions you would ask?
What would you do if you were gonna
draw it out to figure out, A solution?
Where would you start?
An algorithmist is not intimidated
by hard problems like this.
They break it down into smaller and
smaller pieces, and
they solve each small piece, and then they
assemble it into larger and larger pieces.
I'll tell you one question I would ask,
are all my icons the same aspect ratio?
Right, cuz I'm gonna need to figure
out where my icons overlap and
if they're all circular or they're all
square, or some of them are rectangular or
triangular, I'm gonna need to
use some different geometry.
So that's one of the first
clarifying questions.
At every level of zoom, are my icons
the same or are they different?
Here's another little
algorithmic trick for you.
This is more in, it's often used in
game programming and things like that.
We have this notion of what's
called collision detection,
which is, I need to know if two items
are moving across, do they ever overlap?
Are they about to basically hit, like
a bullet hitting a character in a game or
something like that, right,
something moving around?
Collision detection, it's interesting and
I'll just simplify this.
If you think about a box that is
the bounding box for some element and
you wanna ask,
does the bounding box of this
element overlap the bounding
box of some other element?
That's effectively how we
do collision detection.
And it would be similar here, there's
some bounding box around these icons.
And when I zoom out and I render my
icons and their bounding boxes overlap,
do I want to allow any overlap, or
do I want to immediately merge
as soon as there's any overlap?
Is it once they're 70% overlapped,
then I need to merge them?
Those are questions that we wanna ask.
But for a collision detection, if you
have two bounding boxes and they have x,
y coordinates, this is in 2D, it's a lot
easier, same algorithm works in 3D,
but in 2D, it's a lot easier.
But you effectively have to ask eight
questions to see if the x and/or
y coordinate of any of the four
corners is overlapped with the x or
y coordinate of any of the other
four corners of a bounding box.
And by the way, more complex shapes
are typically made up as a composite of
several smaller bounding boxes.
Bounding boxes, the math is a lot easier.
So instead of trying to literally
calculate the intersection with a sphere,
which is much more complicated math,
you might just actually approximate
it with a bunch of smaller boxes.
But anyway, if I needed to know,
is these two boxes overlapping in any way,
you might ask directly, do they overlap?
And the answer to that requires you
to basically do eight if statements.
But here's an interesting observation that
the algorithmist eventually comes to,
which is, we can answer that
question in the negation.
And it turns out you only need four
if statements to be sure that they
don't overlap, and
then you negate the result.
So it's more efficient and
it's less code to maintain.
To write the negation,
I wanna know that they don't overlap and
then I negate that to
know if they do overlap.
So again, thinking like that,
that's part of what an algorithmist
has to learn to do.